I am begging you to start writing more essays,
or to just start writing essays, if you haven't already.
And no, I'm not talking about the essays
that you were told to write in school.
I am talking about one of the greatest tools to learn faster.
Think deeper.
Improve the articulation of your ideas and beliefs
and avoid being replaced by AI.
Yes, I'm serious, but those specifically
are the selfish personal benefits of writing.
That's what you and I get from
the act of putting words on paper.
But there is something a lot deeper.
The modern information
environment is breaking our ability to think.
And most people don't even notice.
And even more don't even care.
Essays might be one of the last forms of content that actually
develops your capacity to make sense of reality,
because right now we are living through the Large-Scale
production of Fake Thinking in history,
and the consequences of this are quite high,
as you'll find out in this video,
and only a select few of you will actually care enough
to take advantage of it and profit from it.
So in this video, I want to show you how this fake
thinking epidemic, as we'll call it.
And if it goes on as it is right now,
which is in a bad downward
direction, will not only make your own life worse,
but will potentially lead to the collapse of civilization.
And then at the end, I want to help you write your first essay
so that you can fix
one of the most precious resources that you have,
which is your mind.
And of course, turning it into a career
or a side income doesn't hurt either.
So the first point here is that the internet isn't dead,
but it's killing us.
And we'll start with a quote from Daniel Stockton.
Berger actually, every quote in this video
is going to be from Daniel Stockton Berger.
The written word as the primary type of media
was probably required
for democracy to work because it required the capacity
to pay attention to an idea for long enough to understand it.
Now, the point of this section is that social media
and I are quite literally a threat to civilization,
and I know you don't see it as that, because all you see it
as is this little app on your phone that you use every day.
And I know it sounds insane, like how could doom scrolling
Instagram Reels eventually lead to the collapse of society?
How could watching a little person dance on TikTok hurt?
How could reading someone's five second 280 character opinion
polarizing opinion on Trump on Twitter ruin the world?
That's just something that you do on your lunch break.
The reason is because you only focus on yourself.
You only think about your own little bubble of life,
and you don't think about the impact or the consequences
of the little unconscious actions
that you've picked up over time.
And so when you zoom out beyond yourself to see
what's really at play, it's hard to unsee.
Now there are three layers to this.
So stick with me because we're going to go deep,
and I promise that it will change the way that you think about
not only writing and essays, but just long form content
in general and social media
and how actually impactful those things can be.
So the first layer is that
the epistemic commons is being poisoned.
So your question then is what is the epistemic comments?
And you can think of it as the water supply.
But for information. So that's social media. That's the news.
That's wherever you get information from a public resource.
So as an example, most people watch the news to stay informed
or to educate themselves.
But if you look closely
you can just see that they're getting complacent.
They're not thinking at all.
Their lives aren't changing for the better.
In fact, more people are just becoming more jaded,
more polarized, and more violent.
Whenever you post on social media
or whenever someone creates a TV show or movie, or whenever
someone produces music on Spotify, the epistemic comments
or public information environment grows.
Now, this obviously gets very complex
and it requires a certain
level of systems thinking to completely understand.
But if the content you publish in public hurts
more than it helps, and is not counterbalanced by content
that does help, our intellectual water
source becomes contaminated.
So why is that bad?
Because the information that you
or any individual consumes influences your identity, right?
If you've watched any of my other videos on identity,
or the self or personality or the psychology behind it all,
you understand that your identity is created through this
feedback loop of information that leads to conditioning,
or information that leads to action,
and once repeated, leads to conditioning,
and that becomes who you are.
So your identity,
which is shaped by the information that you consume,
influences your behavior and thus your trajectory in life.
It determines the outcome of your life.
You think something as simple as reading a little social media
post doesn't determine where you end up in life.
You are wrong.
Now, beyond that, the form of information that you consume.
So a short form tweet or long form books or articles
or podcasts that trains your attention span.
It also trains your tolerance for complexity and ability
to hold contradictions in the capacity for nuance.
And I mean, that's why you learn in the first place, right?
That's why you intentionally consume information.
It's to equip yourself with the knowledge and cognitive
capacity and ability to get what you want in life.
But that's just it.
Before you can solve any problem
that is a civilizational threat in climate governance,
AI alignment, public health, or the rest,
you need a population
capable of understanding the problem coherently.
99% of people don't even know what these problems entail
because they're happy drooling
over the cat video on their phone.
So the takeaway that we'll touch on later
and throughout this video is this does what you consume
or create lead to a beneficial behavior change in yourself
and others, or are you unconsciously soaking in information
that silently makes your life
worse and poisons the information environment
by what you contribute to it?
So that's just layer one.
Now, as a very quick reminder, the build
a two hour content system in 14 days.
I know that's a heck of a name for a cohort slash challenge
that starts very soon.
I put out this video a bit too late, so you're on the timer
link in the description if you want to join that.
So if you are interested in turning intentional, thoughtful
writing into some form of a career or side income,
or simply realize that you do have ideas worth
putting out into the public,
consider joining before the start date.
Now that leads to point number two, which are the three forces
breaking civilization's ability to think?
Another quote from Daniel Berger as technology
is empowering our choices
and we are getting something like the power of gods.
You have to have something like the love
and the wisdom of gods to wield that, or you self-destruct.
So with that quote,
I want to finally introduce you to who I think
is one of the greatest thinkers of our time, Daniel Berger.
He doesn't post much on social media.
I think he hasn't posted in years, actually,
but he does make the occasional appearance on a podcast.
If you just search for him on YouTube.
But when you listen to them, you can instantly tell
that he has a very deep and profound thinker
that is calm, nuanced and non polarizing.
And he has dedicated his life
to what he calls the meta crisis.
And while it's much deeper than what we're talking about
in this video of just posting content on social media or
writing essays, that's what we're personally focused on here,
because that's what I want to talk about today.
So in a nutshell, Daniel Neuberger
believes that there are three
converging forces that can result in three different outcomes,
two of those outcomes being catastrophic in the three forces
that are converging or threats to civilization in society.
So the three threats or what he calls generator functions,
or first rivalrous dynamics, which are win
lose games where one party's gain requires another's loss.
So think arms races or corporate competition, or social media
content and academic publishing
like hoarding data to publish first.
The second is substrate consumption.
Substrate is what something needs to exist, like soil
for plants, attention for media, or trust for markets.
When systems consume their foundation faster
than they can regenerate, that's bad.
So you can think depleting topsoil
that took millennia to form and the attention
economy consuming human cognitive capacity
faster than it recovers.
And the third threat is exponential technology.
So tools and systems that improve themselves
at accelerating rates, outpacing human wisdom.
You can think AI doubling in capacity,
automated weapons and social media
algorithms evolving faster than we can study
their psychological impacts.
So when those three things converge,
they can result in civilizational collapse.
So nuclear war, unaligned AI, ecological destruction
or engineered pandemics,
or outside of civilizational collapse,
they can result in dystopian control.
So think total surveillance just being surveilled all the time
or digital authoritarianism,
or just the elimination of agency in the ability
to make your own choices.
So he calls these two outcomes attractors.
Those are the two attractors
that we're trying to avoid heading towards.
And they are kind of like the basins
that a lot of complex societies already fall into.
If you look around the world
now, the third attractor or the good outcome,
here is a world where sense making, shared
understanding and aligned incentives exist.
Now, when we look at the internet,
AI and social media, it's pretty easy to see this playing out.
As an example, content creators compete for attention
so they optimize for engagement
rather than transformation,
which is the rivalrous dynamics part.
Because the algorithm doesn't measure transformation,
it measures how much someone
viewed the thing or liked the thing or shared the thing.
So creators are much more likely to abandon truth
or transformation for whatever will make people react.
That's an obvious problem.
So when engagement is optimized
in someone consumes that information.
Like you watching this video,
it does not require thinking or understanding.
So the viewer's mental muscle thinking muscle atrophies.
AI accelerates content production, yes,
but it also accelerates imitation.
And when there is only destructive content to imitate,
you can see where that goes.
So AI itself isn't the issue.
The issue is that it can mimic what looks like real thinking
without requiring any cognitive effort
from either the creator or the consumer.
So the default outcome here
is that the epistemic commons, or mental
water supply becomes poisoned incredibly fast,
because it's optimized for content
that looks like it should shift your thinking,
but structurally it cannot.
So that's layer two, which leads to layer three,
which is what you can actually do about it
and how you can profit from it in a meaningful way.
So point number three is
why essays may be the last bastion of real thinking.
In another quote,
wisdom is not algorithmic and cannot be made algorithmic.
Now for the past few decades,
a certain type of content has dominated the internet,
specifically content that delivers conclusions
without requiring thought.
In other words, it's fast food for the mind.
So we're going to call this category of media
or information fast content,
because social media companies use
the same psychological triggers to get you addicted as fast
food companies who realized fat, sugar
and salt were a scarce good, that our brains aren't wired
to have an abundance, finding those resources spike dopamine
because they eat it in survival.
So, on the fast content end of the spectrum,
you have BuzzFeed listicles, rage tweets,
AI generated summaries, hot takes, engagement
optimized threads, and TikTok explainers.
They give you the feeling of understanding in 30s.
It makes sense
why everyone thinks they're an expert these days.
Now, on the slow content end of the spectrum, or content
that requires you to think and potentially
change your behavior, you have essays,
long form non optimized conversations, certain books,
certain lectures, and even tweets crafted in a way that make
you think to receive the insight.
Now, I personally want to focus on essays,
but all of this type of content is good
and that's actually what we go over in the challenge
that I mentioned link in the description.
So why essays?
Because they are something that you can produce alone
and leverage to take advantage of the meaning economy
we're heading into.
And essays are the most scalable and durable form.
A meaningful conversation can shift one person,
but it lives and dies in the memory of the participants.
An essay develops the readers and writers thinking capacity,
and it can do that for thousands of people
across thousands of years.
More on that in a bit.
And on top of that, most people, including me, including you,
walk around with opinions that they've never thought through.
They feel like they believe something,
but they've never sat down
and tried to write out exactly what they believe in.
The especially haven't tried to write it down in a way
that would survive a smart person's criticism.
And it also doesn't hurt that some of the world's most
respected minds were forged through the act of writing essays.
So Paul Graham for the tech pros,
or Isaac Newton for the science prose,
or Jordan Peterson in his prime, or Nietzsche or Emerson,
or a lot of people.
The defining factor of an essay is that I cannot write one now
for understanding what an essay actually is.
It helps to distinguish an essay
from an article, articles or answers,
while essays or arguments articles package existing knowledge,
while essays change
the author's beliefs, articles start with the conclusion,
while essays figure it out.
Articles inform or educate.
While essays are an act of thinking, articles communicate
what's already there, while essays discover what isn't.
Now, this video isn't to say that
you should never write an article, and it's also not to say
that essays and articles don't overlap in some way.
What I'm trying to say is that you should write
with the intention of refining
what you believe
in, actually impacting the other person on the other side.
Now, if you think about it, only a human can write an essay
because a robot
doesn't have a situated point of view,
it does not have direct experience.
It can simulate the perspective
you tell it to adopt, but it lacks the beliefs,
biases, and emotions
that lead you to think and question in a particular direction.
And honestly, I use AI a lot.
It would be nearly impossible to pass off all of that context.
It would need to be hooked into your brain
like Neuralink at all
times, in order to understand every passing moment,
every experience.
How you get information.
It would have to understand all of your memories,
all of your unconscious,
everything that leads to you being who you are today.
That's why I've been saying for the longest time that you are
the niche.
You are the most valuable resource, your point of view.
I've talked about that in multiple videos,
so I doesn't have access to that,
because every passing moment influences your point of view.
And in order to have a meaningful point of view worth
writing about or we're talking about,
you can't be sitting at your desk
all day on Claud 24 over seven.
You have to engage in novel experiences.
You have to live life.
You can't live.
The optimized, efficient productivity
life of just staring at your laptop all day.
So while everyone is just locked in to the agents,
the new agents, the open floor,
getting them to just build a bunch of nonsense
that is going to get them nowhere,
you have to actually reject that.
Go out, experience life, build a good life,
and then bring that online because nobody else is doing that.
That's how you become unique.
And now I think the more important point here
is that I've recently realized
that I destroys the magic of surprise and discovery.
In other words, it destroys creativity.
Sure, I can be creative in some ways,
but this is a crucial point.
You can tell AI to share something novel,
but then you are anticipating it.
It is no longer novel.
It's no longer surprise
you destroyed any chance of stumbling upon a discovery.
In other words,
you destroyed any chance of actually discovering it.
It may give you good material to write about,
but it was not from your own creative ability and thinking.
So the more I use AI, the more useful I find it,
because it's incredibly useful.
But on the other edge of the sword,
I find that it exhausts creativity extremely fast
because creativity is kind of sparse.
Again, it requires you to go out, do things, experience
something novel, and then you have a little bit
to write about.
But with AI you can just give it to the AI
and then it does everything for you.
And now, like you are empty creatively,
you didn't take the time to actually sit with it, understand
it, think through it.
So as someone who is still very pro AI,
I can't help but believe
that the most relevant content on the internet going
forward will be in essay form, solo content.
And I don't only mean long form, I mean anything
that is the opposite of what an article is like.
We went over.
So that leads to point number four,
which is about the meaning economy and how to thrive in it.
So we talked about this in a future video that was called
The Future of Work and the New high income skill stack,
and it got a decent amount of views, but I still think it's
vastly underrated and more people should go watch it.
It's like five videos ago that I posted,
but in that video I talk about the meaning economy.
And this meaning economy,
so to say, has been emerging for a few years now,
and AI has only accelerated this
and made this more of a thing.
I would argue that I'm a part of the meaning economy
and many value creators,
which we'll touch on in a bit, form this meaning economy,
or at least the starts of it.
So why is this important?
Because meaning is the scarcest commodity
in civilization right now.
Before industrialization, we praised gods in the sky.
During industrialization, we made productivity. Are God.
Today more is our God.
More money, more information, more content.
We have more stuff and less purpose than ever.
So in my eyes, meaning will be sold at a premium.
People will crave it more than they already do
because most people in today's world feel lonely, feel empty,
feel like they don't have any purpose, feel like
they're not working towards anything greater than themselves.
They're just stuck on their computer
all day, hoping that pulling the eye slot machine
or doing the repetitive tasks
that they were assigned leads to something good.
And so who better to provide that meaning than those who shape
the epistemic commons or the mental water supply,
or the information environment?
It's the value creators
who fight against the poisoning of the water supply.
Now the question is how is meaning created or experienced?
Because we need to understand that before
we can actually replicate it.
I guess when attention is fragmented, scattered,
and pulled in competing directions, that's psychic entropy.
It feels like anxiety, boredom, and restlessness.
It's chaos when attention is invested in a complex,
challenging activity with clear feedback
that psychic neg entropy.
It feels like flow, purpose and meaning.
It's order.
So meaning isn't something you find out there in the world.
It's a state of consciousness
that emerges when your attention is ordered
towards something complex enough to fully engage you.
If you are level ten, a level one challenge is boring,
and a level 20 challenge is daunting.
But a level 11 challenge is just enough to lock you in.
So in other words,
meaning is the experience of ordered consciousness.
Now, along the same vein,
meaning is created through the process
of ordering consciousness, the act of ordering
consciousness or taking chaos and creating structure
or wrestling with complexity
until it coheres results in meaning.
Obviously,
if the experience of ordered consciousness is meaningful.
So if you've ever been stuck in a rut or wrestled
with where your life should go and eventually receive this
like burst of clarity that launches you into this intense
season of life, you've directly experience this.
So what does this have to do with content,
essays, writing, etc.?
One is that fast content or entropic pre digested algorithmic
AI generated content skips the ordering process and delivers
prepackaged conclusions.
The reader's consciousness stays and becomes more disordered.
They received information but didn't generate meaning.
That's why they feel informed.
But empty too.
Is that slow content.
So essays genuine thinking in public or insight
that requires effort
requires both the writer
and the reader to engage in the ordering process.
The writer orders their own consciousness
through the act of writing.
The reader reorders
their thoughts by properly digesting the thinking.
So what's the opportunity here?
The main thing is that the world doesn't need
more rage bait posters and mainstream news channels.
It also doesn't need more people competing
to become the most productive person
in the world,
and trying to build the next billion dollar AI company.
Instead, it needs ordinary people
who make sense of their own minds and document them in public.
Now, previously,
I've called these types of people value creators.
I quite literally have a video called The Value Creator
or The rise of the Value Creator, and now I call them
value creators because they're very distinct
from your typical influencer or personal brand.
It's a person who chooses a positive trajectory
for their life, cares deeply about the interests and skills
that help move the needle toward that, and passes
their journey down
from their point of view
to others who can relate and benefit from it.
By all measures, I believe this is a futureproof
and deeply meaningful way to live.
Sure, you weren't creating a tangible physical product
to show that you've actually done something,
or that you have a real job,
but you are causing a greater cascade.
That is, you are providing the route.
You're providing the information that influences identity,
that influences behavior,
that influences the flourishing
or destruction of civilization.
And in my eyes, even building rockets isn't that impactful.
That's honestly why I do what I do.
Or maybe not why I chose to do this.
I kind of stumbled upon it, but I found that
this was just a deeply meaningful way to live.
It's very purposeful. It feels good.
So that leads to point number five, which is how to think in
public and why it's the most valuable skill you can develop.
Now, it's kind of funny here because with this video
it's just a polished package, right.
There's cuts that cut out everything
but the outline of this video or the newsletter.
Subscribe to my Substack
if you want these before they go out on YouTube.
This was incredibly difficult to write and just think through.
I actually had three other drafts of Why You Should
Write Essays that I scrapped entirely,
because they just didn't feel right.
But by sticking with the challenge
and really trying to synthesize a point of view
that I actually aligned with
and that I felt was true and impactful has changed my mind.
It's helped me articulate and cohere
or make something coherent in my mind.
And if this video changes your mind or your behavior
in some way,
that brings even more meaning into my life and yours.
And now I hope you can experience that same feeling.
So we need to get a bit practical here.
I want you to try writing your first essay of some form,
even if it's difficult.
It's supposed to be difficult,
especially if you're not a writer.
So I put a few points together.
These are going to be rapid fire, so it's not too long.
But this should get you started, right?
You don't need that much to just start with.
Take out a piece of paper and start writing,
or to open up an app and start writing.
So here's how you write an essay.
First is write to discover, not to perform.
Because most social media engagement comes from packaging
anyway, and you can learn about that later.
So start with a concept, viewpoint, question, experience,
thought, or something that bothers you or just a topic.
An essay begins with uncertainty and an open mind.
Two is right about what genuinely interests you.
Focus on a single main idea.
Use this as a time to research and learn.
Go down rabbit holes. Challenge everyone's point of view.
Do not accept one source as law three.
Resist the template.
You'll find how you like to structure your writing
as you get better at it.
It's a skill.
Remember that. But for now, just write.
Have a debate with yourself.
Ask questions to keep the writing going.
Then worry about the structure and ask for help if you want.
Do the thinking first for ask.
Do I actually believe this?
It's easy to write what you already believe,
but the point of this is to change what you believe.
This is the most difficult part.
Resist the urge to act like you are absolutely right.
Five read essays and consume central content.
Your sense making capacity is shaped by your inputs.
You can't expect the for you page to feed you this content.
You must actively search, curate and nurture
your digital feed.
Six build a body of work, not a content calendar.
People don't follow creators for one piece of content
they follow for their body of coherent work.
Each essay compounds on the last.
I can't replicate a coherent philosophy built
through years of genuine thinking, so that makes sense.
But where do you start?
If you actually want to do this online,
I would recommend ECS or Substack
because that's where you're really seeing
the revival of long form content.
I mean, I was runner up in the $1 million challenge
of the articles
when they brought articles back in mind, went insanely viral.
Substack, I think, is the most slept on social media right now
because one, you own your audience, people
who follow or subscribe to you, you have a list of them too.
It's email first, and if you understand anything
about newsletters or email marketing, you understand how
powerful that is.
And three, they have a notes feed of people
who actually appreciate deep and genuine thinking.
So if you need somewhere to write, I just start with Substack
or X, depending on which one you vibe with the most.
Now, I've written about that in my newsletter,
and I've talked about it in multiple videos before,
so we're going to leave it at that.
I think that's enough.
And again, if you want a guided challenge to do this
and you want to understand frameworks for writing
and how to generate or capture ideas,
or how to just figure out
what you want to talk about
or how to phrase things in an impactful way.
Then consider joining the build
a two hour content system in 14 days
challenge that starts very, very soon
because I got this video out late.
Link in the description for that.
If you don't join that, at least like and subscribe
if you like this video and I'll see you in the next one. Bye.